---
title: "The Music Value Chain"
subtitle: "A map of the music ecosystem"
date: 2022-02-15T17:00:00+01:00
lastmod: 2022-02-16T08:15:00+01:00
draft: false

authors: ["daniel_antal"]

tags: [ "Digital Music Observatory", "value chain", "music ecosystem"]

summary: "Our ambition is to build a comprehensive data source and online data analysis tools for the European music industry. This requires a map of the music ecosystem — we need to understand where value is created and money is exchanged, and we need to observe how much is this value and how much is being paid for it."

# Featured image
image:
  # Caption (optional)
  caption: "The Music Industry Value Chain [reuse>](https://figshare.com/articles/figure/The_Music_Industry_Value_Chain/19174310)"


  # Options: Smart, Center, TopLeft, Top, TopRight, Left, Right, BottomLeft, Bottom, BottomRight
  focal_point: "Center"


  preview_only: true

---

**Our ambition is to build a comprehensive data source and online data
analysis tools for the European music industry. This requires a map of
the music ecosystem — we need to understand where value is created and
money is exchanged, and we need to observe how much is this value and
how much is being paid for it.**

The value chain is a concept describing the full chain of a businesses'
activities in the creation of a product or service – from the initial
reception of materials all the way through its delivery to market, and
everything in between. Some services, like car manufacturing and banking
services, are offered by a large corporation that creates the service
alone. The music industry is different. In Europe it comprises of
hundreds of thousands of freelancers, microenterprises, and a few
small-and medium sized or large enterprises that form a creative network
to deliver projects.

Our initial view of the European music value chain is depicted in the
chart. 

<td style="text-align: center;">{{< figure src="/blogposts_2022/Music_value_chain.png" caption="If you think we put something in the wrong place, or you do not find an activity important to you:  [let us know!](https://reprex.nl/#contact)." numbered="false" >}}</td>

Our value chain model was perfected in various research and development
projects that aimed to understand the problems and increase the revenues
of the
[Hungarian](https://music.dataobservatory.eu/publication/made_in_hungary/),
[Slovak](https://music.dataobservatory.eu/publication/slovak_music_industry_2019/),
[Croatian](https://music.dataobservatory.eu/publication/private_copying_croatia_2019/),
and
[UK](https://music.dataobservatory.eu/publication/mce_empirical_streaming_2021/)
music industries. We have asked over 8 years more than 4000 music
professionals in 12 countries about how they work and how they get paid
(See our [Central European Music Industry
Report](https://ceereport2020.ceemid.eu/supply.html).)

It is based on the standard, accepted description of the music industry
with the “three revenue stream model” in the United States (Hull et al.
2011) and the European Union (Leurdijk et al. 2012; Leurdijk and Ottilie
2012). It is built upon the actual application of competition law in EU
jurisdictions (Antal 2017, 2019), and it is intended for further
research and publication.

The value chain is a good tool to localize information sources and plan
to collect data in a systematic way. For example, in the case of our
music value chain we must focus on some challenges:

- [x]   Unlike in other industries, most hours of music are listened to
    without paying consumers (radio, YouTube, ad-supported streams, home
    copying, torrenting). Understanding the advertising revenue streams
    is important.

-  [x]  The music industry is both very local and global. Small labels sell
    all over the world on digital platforms. But they should focus on
    markets where there is an interest for their music or where the
    prices are high, where they have a real chance to get playlisted.

-  [x] We must understand why some languages, or women are disadvantaged in
    this value chain, and what intervention can help this situation.

The aim of our mapping is to help the industry solve real problems: keep
its revenues in line with the growth of uses in more and more electronic
gadgets where people use music, compensate home copying, or close the
value gap, or find out where women get underpaid or underrepresented.
Our value chain helps us designing data collection plans for complex
analysis of music uses, prices and revenues that we will introduce in a
subsequent blogpost.

<td style="text-align: center;">{{< figure src="/blogposts_2022/full_market_example.jpg" caption="" numbered="false" >}}</td>


{{% callout note %}} You can read more about it in our dynamic [The Relevant Market for Music Streaming: Market Definition and Measurement Challenges](https://music-competition.dataobservatory.eu/) document is a versioned work-in-progress publication, available from the Zenodo open
science repository and our opinion on the UK competition authorities
music streaming market inquiry (Competition & Markets Authority 2022).
{{% /callout %}}

## References

Antal, Daniel. 2017. “The Competition of Unlicensed, Licensed and
Illegal Uses on the Markets of Music and Audiovisual Works \[<span
class="nocase">A szabad felhasználások, a jogosított tartalmak és az
illegális felhasználások versenye a zenék és audiovizuális alkotások
hazai piacán</span>\].” Artisjus - not public.

———. 2019. “The Competition of Unlicensed, Licensed and Illegal Uses on
the Markets of Music and Audiovisual Works \[<span class="nocase">A
szabad felhasználások, a jogosított tartalmak és az illegális
felhasználások versenye a zenék és audiovizuális alkotások hazai
piacán</span>\].” Artisjus - not public.

Competition & Markets Authority. 2022. “Music and Streaming Market
Study. Statement of Scope.” Competition & Markets Authority.
<https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/61f17285d3bf7f0546a99df2/Music_and_streaming_Statement_of_Scope_final.pdf>.

Hull, Geoffrey P., Thomas W. Hutchison, Richard Strasser, and Geoffrey
P. Hull. 2011. *The Music Business and Recording Industry Delivering
Music in the 21st Century*. New York: Routledge.
<http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&scope=site&db=nlebk&db=nlabk&AN=345262>.

Leurdijk, Adnra, Sivlian de Munck, Tijs van den Broek, Arjana van der
Plas, Walter Manshanden, and Elmer Rietveld. 2012. “Statistical,
Ecosystems and Competitiveness Analysis of the Media and Content
Industries: A Quantiative Overview.” EUR 25277 EN. Edited by Jean Paul
Simon. Seville:Spain: Joint Research Centre of the European Commission -
Institute for Prospective Technological Studies.
<http://ftp.jrc.es/EURdoc/JRC69435.pdf>.

Leurdijk, Adnra, and Nieuwenhuis Ottilie. 2012. “Statistical, Ecosystems
and Competitiveness Analysis of the Media and Content Industries. The
Music Industry.” 25277 EN. Edited by Jean Paul Simon. Luxembourg:
Publications Office of the European Union, 2012: Joint Research Centre
Institute for Prospective Technological Studies (IPTS).
<http://ftp.jrc.es/EURdoc/JRC69816.pdf>.
