---
title: CEEMID
subtitle: CEEMID (2014-2020) is now the Digital Music Observatory

# Date this page was created.
date: 2019-02-27T00:00:00
lastmod: 2022-04-11T17:00:00

# Project summary to display on homepage.
summary: CEEMID was multi-country project that was a predecessor of Reprex’s Digital Music Observatory.

# Tags: can be used for filtering projects.
tags:
- CEEMID

# Optional external URL for project (replaces project detail page).
external_link: ""

# Slides (optional).
#   E.g. `slides: "example-slides"` references
#   `content/slides/example-slides.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `slides: ""`.
slides: "CEEMID"

# Links (optional).
url_pdf: ""
url_slides: ""
url_video: ""
url_code: ""

# Custom links (optional).
#   Uncomment line below to enable. For multiple links, use the form `[{...}, {...}, {...}]`.
#url_custom: [{icon_pack: "fab", icon="twitter", name="Follow", url: "https://twitter.com/georgecushen"}]

# Featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your project's folder.
image: 
  # Caption (optional)
  caption: ""

  # Focal point (optional)
  # Options: Smart, Center, TopLeft, Top, TopRight, Left, Right, BottomLeft, Bottom, BottomRight
  focal_point: "Smart"
---


The *Feasibility study for the establishment of a European Music
Observatory* (in short: EMO Feasibility Study)[1] has identified four
critical data gaps related to the diversity and circulation of European
music. This is a key business planning and policy problem, and of
course, a serious shortcoming for better music research in Europe.

According to the *EMO Feasibility Study*, "there is already an existing
pool of data that would allow the European Music Observatory to start
compiling information about the European music sector. Various potential
sources and providers of data are … \[*available, such as our [Digital Music Observatory](https://music.dataobservatory.eu/).*\]. Many of these providers have already indicated
support for a future European Music Observatory, and are willing to
collaborate and provide data. However, some data is not collected or is
not aggregated in a way that it can be compared across Europe[2].

## From CEEMID to the Digital Music Observatory

The [Digital Music Observatory](https://music.dataobservatory.eu/)
(formerly CEEMID) has been identified among these data sources[3].
CEEMID was originally an acronym for a data integration project that
aimed to *Create a Regional Music Database to Support Professional
National Reporting, Economic Valuation and a Regional Music Study*[4].
According to the European Commission’s feasibility study, “CEEMID can
transfer thousands of indicators that are reproducible and verifiable,
open-source software that creates them to a European Music Observatory.
In particular, CEEMID provides a useful and interesting approach to
harnessing the possibilities of open data in Europe in relation to the
music sector, which should be further explored by the European Music
Observatory in its start-up phase.”[5]

The Digital Music Observatory is built on the gradual, and open
extension of the original CEEMID consortium, and builds on practical
research and innovation that contributed to many music policy goals in
an increasing number of countries since 2014. The original CEEMID
consortium delivered the first Hungarian music industry studies
(followed by several subsequent ones), the Slovak national music
industry study, *Private Copying in Croatia*, and eventually the
regional Central European Music Industry Report.[6] All of these
industry studies addressed the problem of shrinking competitiveness in
of the small language repertoire in the streaming era.

<td style="text-align: center;">{{< figure src="/img/slides/cisac_good_governance_2013.png" caption="Historically CEEMID started out as the _Central and Eastern European Music Industry Databases_ out of necessity following a [CISAC Good Governance Seminar for European Societies](https://ceemid.eu/post/2013-11-18_cisac_goodgov/) in 2013, and eventually grew out of an abandoned GESAC project. The adoption of European single market and copyright rules, and the increased activity of competition authority and regulators required a more structured approach to set collective royalty and compensations tariffs in a region that was regarded traditionally as data-poor with lower quantity of industry and government data sources available." numbered="false" >}}</td>

The _EMO Feasibility Study_ is built on the consensus of many European music
organizations around a shared understanding “that a European Music
Observatory should act as a centralised music data and an intelligence
hub at European level.” However, as a pilot project and policy brief
carried out in Finland[7], or the CEEMID project in Central and Eastern
Europe has shown, has its limits. We believe that the existing data
availability is better than that described in the *Feasibility study*,
and since the creation of this report, it has only got better.

Since 2014, the [Digital Music
Observatory](https://music.dataobservatory.eu/) (former CEEMID)
successfully piloted data collection, standardization and harmonization
procedures that can fill all the data gaps identified in the music
diversity and circulation pillar of the future European Music
Observatory. CEEMID was transformed into a “Demo Music Observatory” on
15 September 2020[8] and eventually named *Digital Music Observatory* in
2021. Its policy relevance was also recognized in the United Kingdom
after Brexit[9].

The [Digital Music Observatory](https://music.dataobservatory.eu/)
follows the *Open Policy Analysis Guidelines*[10] The OPA Guidelines
give practical guidance on how to improve the transparency,
replicability, and as a result, the reusability of the policy-making
work with a scientific underpinning.

The *EMO Feasibility Study* acknowledges the importance of open data.
The “EMO should also take advantage of open data where possible. Open
data is data that can be freely used, re-used and redistributed by
anyone. \[…\] Using some form of open source software where relevant
would allow an EMO to access a continuous peer-review of data ingestion,
processing, corrections and indicator creation by statisticians, data
scientists and academics.”[11]

As stated in this final report, the 2019 Open Data Directive further
extended the availability of re-usable public sector information (PSI)
with *open science data*. . In both PSI, as open government data, and in
open science data, there is a huge potential to fill in the data gaps
without new data collection—the fact that data can be reused instead of
being recollected is the main aim of the directive. However, open data
does not mean *public data*. Open data means that taxpayer-funded
research data can be repurposed, reprocessed, and reused—the Digital
Music Observatory is an expert on such data science techniques.

The *Digital Music Observatory is not an alternative to the future
European Music Observatory*, just its open source, open data driven
voluntary, based on open collaboration with music industry stakeholders,
music policy makers and users, academic researchers, individual and
citizen scientists, and individual artists. Because we create fully
automated research tools that are creating open datasets, and open
source software, even our research infrastructure can be fully
transferred to a future European Music Observatory[12].

<td style="text-align: center;">{{< figure src="/img/reports/ceereport_2020/frontcover_wide.jpg" caption="The [Central European Music Industry Report 2020](https://ceereport2020.ceemid.eu/) concluded the CEEMID project showing that building meaningful statistical indicators for the live performance, recording and publishing sides of the music industry is possible even in seemingly data poor emerging and future markets. Our Report was presented as a [best practice](https://music.dataobservatory.eu/post/2020-01-30-ceereport/) by the European Commission and the Geothe Institute in 2020." numbered="false" >}}</td>


We are not planning to make a competing data observatory. We want to
provide a minimum viable model of creating at least a hundred useful
indicators—selected from hundreds of indicator-candidates with user
feedback— that goes through the unit-testing of data science and
computer science, the peer-review of open-source scientific
algorithm/software development, the methodological peer-review of
science, and eventually user verification from music industry users.
This will make sure that the indicators can be reproduced, refreshed,
and placed in a future European Music Observatory with at least as good
data quality as one would expect from a governmental statistical source
or Eurostat.

The aim of the Digital Music Observatory is to maximize transparency by
introducing to the policy context of Music Moves Europe, and the wider
European music ecosystem the Open Policy Analysis framework. (See [Open
Collaboration, Open Policy Analysis, and Open
Data](#obj-diversity-OPA).)

## Open Collaboration, Open Policy Analysis, and Open Data

We aim to maximize transparency by introducing to the policy context of
Music Moves Europe, and the wider European music ecosystem the Open
Policy Analysis framework. (BITSS 2019; Hoces de la Guardia, Grant, and
Miguel 2020b).

Our policy tools will make possible the first, large scale European
application of the Open Policy Analysis, which grew out from several
initiatives in research transparency, such as the Berkeley Initiative
for Transparency in the Social Sciences, the Data Access and Research
Transparency (DA-RT) group, the Center for Open Science and their TOP
Guideline, the Meta-Research Innovation Center at Stanford University.
Globally, the World Bank promotes this framework (Hoces de la Guardia,
Grant, and Miguel 2020b; Berkeley Initiative for Transparency in the
Social Sciences et al. 2020) and they are fully in line with the Open
Science objectives of the European Union (Commission et al. 2020).

<td style="text-align: center;">{{< figure src="/blogposts_2022/OPA_main_figure_with_source.png" caption="Our ambition to increase transparency with introducing the Open Policy Analysis into the European music policies and collaborative data use in the European industry." numbered="false" >}}</td>

We believe that existing data availability is better than that described
in the *Feasibility study*. As stated in this final report, the 2019
Open Data Directive further extended the availability of re-usable
public sector information (PSI) with open science data. In both PSI, as
open government data, and in open science data, there is a huge
potential to fill in the data gaps without new data collection—the fact
that data can be reused instead of being recollected is the main aim of
the directive. These open data sources are legally open but are not
accessible without further investment, and our Consortium wants to make
this investment, and produce about 50% of all the data needs of the
future European Music Observatory.

It also mentioned the work CEEMID, a bottom-up initiative originally
started by three collective management societies, and eventually joined
by more than 60 stakeholders in 12 European countries to fill in some of
these gaps with a) voluntary data integration among partners b) open
data re-processing c) co-financed data collection. Our proposal wants to
put the former CEEMID, currently named Digital Music Observatory, a more
solid scientific and methodological foundation, to make it more
user-friendly, and to exploit state-of-art statistical, data science and
computer science methods to provide more comprehensive, timely, and
accurate services for the European music sector.

# References

Antal, Daniel. 2015. “A Proart <span class="nocase">zeneipari
jelentése.</span> \[The Music Industry Report of Proart\].” ProArt
Szövetség a Szerzői Jogokért Egyesület.
<http://zeneipar.info/letoltes/proart-zeneipari-jelentes-2015.pdf>.

———. 2017. “The Growth of the Hungarian Popular Music Repertoire: Who
Creates It And How Does It Find An Audience.” In *Made in Hungary*, 1st
ed. Studies in Popular Music. New York, NY: USA: Routledge.

———. 2019a. “Private Copying <span class="nocase">in</span> Croatia.”
<https://www.zamp.hr/uploads/documents/Studija_privatno_kopiranje_u_Hrvatskoj_DA_CEEMID.pdf>.

———. 2019b. “Slovak Music Industry Report \[Správa <span
class="nocase">o slovenskom hudobnom priemysle</span>\].”
<https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/V3BE9>.

———. 2020. “Central And Eastern European Music Industry Report 2020.”
CEEMID, Consolidated Independent.
<https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.21450.31686>.

Artisjus, HDS, SOZA, and Candole Partners. 2014. “Measuring and
Reporting Regional Economic Value Added, National Income and Employment
by the Music Industry in a Creative Industries Perspective. Memorandum
of Understanding to Create a Regional Music Database to Support
Professional National Reporting, Economic Valuation and a Regional Music
Study.”

Berkeley Initiative for Transparency in the Social Sciences, Aleksandar
Bogdanoski, Carson Christiano, Joel Ferguson, Fernando Hoces de la
Guardia, Katherine Hoeberling, Edward Miguel, Emma Ng, and Lars
Vilhuber. 2020. “Guide for Accelerating Computational Reproducibility in
the Social Sciences.” Berkeley Initiative for Transparency in the Social
Sciences. <https://bitss.github.io/ACRE/intro.html>.

BITSS. 2019. “Guidelines for Open Policy Analysis.” Berkeley Initiative
for Transparency in the Social Sciences.
<http://www.bitss.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/OPA-Guidelines.pdf>.

Commission, European, Directorate-General for Research, Innovation, L
Baker, I Cristea, T Errington, K Jaśko, et al. 2020. *Reproducibility of
Scientific Results in the EU : Scoping Report*. Edited by W Lusoli.
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union.
<https://doi.org/doi/10.2777/341654>.

EUR-Lex. 2019. “Directive (EU) 2019/790 of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 17 April 2019 on Copyright and Related Rights in the
Digital Single Market and Amending Directives 96/9/EC and 2001/29/EC
(Text with EEA Relevance.).” *Official Journal of the European Union* OJ
L (130): 92–125. <http://data.europa.eu/eli/dir/2019/790/oj>.

European Commission, Directorate-General for Education, Youth, Sport and
Culture, M Clarke, P Vroonhof, J Snijders, A Le Gall, B Jacquemet, et
al. 2020. *Feasibility Study for the Establishment of a European Music
Observatory : Final Report*. Publications Office of the European Union.
<https://doi.org/doi/10.2766/9691>.

Hoces de la Guardia, Fernando, Sean Grant, and Edward Miguel. 2020b.
“<span class="nocase">A framework for open policy analysis</span>.”
*Science and Public Policy* 48 (2): 154–63.
<https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scaa067>.

———. 2020a. “<span class="nocase">A framework for open policy
analysis</span>.” *Science and Public Policy* 48 (2): 154–63.
<https://doi.org/10.1093/scipol/scaa067>.

Osimo, David, Pujol Priego Laya, Turo Pekari, and Ano Sirppiniemi. 2019.
“A Symphony, Not a Solo. How Collective Management Organisations Can
Embrace Innovation and Drive Data Sharing in the Music Industry.”
Teosto.
<https://www.teosto.fi/app/uploads/2020/10/27134714/a-symphony-not-a-solo-policy-brief-final-09012019.pdf>.

state51 Music Group. 2020. “Written Evidence Submitted by <span
class="nocase">The state51 Music Group.</span> Economics of Music
Streaming Review. Response to Call for Evidence.” UK Parliament website.
<https://committees.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/15422/html/>.

[1] Feasibility study for the establishment of a European Music
Observatory (European Commission et al. 2020).

[2] Feasibility study for the establishment of a European Music
Observatory (European Commission et al. 2020, pp31–34).

[3] Our observatory is mentioned to be ablet to participate with “data
collection and integration system based on open data, opensources and
online surveys” in all pillars of the future European Music Observatory,
including Diversity & Circulation (European Commission et al. 2020,
p40.)

[4] The original aim of CEEMID was *Measuring and Reporting Regional
Economic Value Added, National Income and Employment by the Music
Industry in a Creative Industries Perspective* Three national collective
management societies and their consultant signed Memorandum of
Understanding about this in 2014 (Artisjus et al. 2014).

[5] Feasibility study for the establishment of a European Music
Observatory (European Commission et al. 2020, pp147–148).

[6] [A ProArt zeneipari
jelentése](https://music.dataobservatory.eu/publication/hungary_music_industry_2014/)
(Antal 2015) and *The Growth of the Hungarian Popular Music Repertoire:
Who Creates It And How Does It Find An Audience* (Antal 2017); [Správa o
slovenskom hudobnom
priemysle](https://music.dataobservatory.eu/publication/slovak_music_industry_2019/)
(Antal 2019b), [Private copying in
Croatia](https://music.dataobservatory.eu/publication/private_copying_croatia_2019/)
(Antal 2019a), [Central Euroepan Music Industry
Report](https://ceereport2020.ceemid.eu/) (Antal 2020).

[7] See the Policy Brief *A Symphony, not a Solo* (Osimo et al. 2019).

[8] Antal-Szentirmay: Launching Our Demo Music Obervatory
([blogpost](Launching%20Our%20Demo%20Music%20Observatory))

[9] Written evidence submitted by The state51 Music Group. Economics of
music streaming review. Response to call for evidence (state51 Music
Group 2020).

[10] The [Open Policy Analysis
Guidelines](http://www.bitss.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/OPA-Guidelines.pdf)
which grew out from several initiatives in research transparency, such
as the Berkeley Initiative for Transparency in the Social Sciences, the
Data Access and Research Transparency (DA-RT) group, the Center for Open
Science and their TOP Guideline, the Meta-Research Innovation Center at
Stanford University (BITSS 2019; Hoces de la Guardia, Grant, and Miguel
2020a).

[11] In the EU, open data is governed by Directive (EU) 2019/1024 on
open data and the re-use of public sector information (EUR-Lex 2019),
which replaced the Public Sector Information Directive, also known as
the ‘PSI Directive’ which dated from 2003 and was subsequently amended
in 2013. Feasibility study for the establishment of a European Music
Observatory (European Commission et al. 2020, p38).

[12] In other words, our aim, fully in line with the intentions of the
Commission expert who were encouraging us to make this proposal, and
with the Feasibility Study, is to create open source
scientific/statistical software and pilot open data that can be utilized
in 4/4 identified data gaps related to music diverstiy and circulation
in the European Music Observatory.
